# pydircolors - color filenames for terminal display
Do you like file/directory listings in your terminal to be colorized? Do you like how GNU coreutils'
`ls` command does it? Want to incorporate that functionality into a Python application? Then
`pydircolors` is the library for you!

This library is currently in Alpha development stage, but I'm getting close to an initial release.

## System Requirements
`pydircolors` is intended for console use on POSIX-like systems. It's developed on Linux, but should
work in any terminal that supports xterm-style 16 color escape sequences and environments with
POSIX-compatible `stat()` syscalls. Notably, `cmd.exe` terminals on native Windows are not
supported, but Cygwin works.

`pydircolors` requires Python 3.3 or newer. The main limitation is that the `dir_fd` and
`follow_symlinks` keyword args to [`os.stat()`](https://docs.python.org/3/library/os.html#os.stat)
are used, which were added in Python 3.3. It'd be possible to add support for older versions
(including Python 2.7) with compatibility shims. If you ask nicely, I'll a) be overjoyed that
someone's actually using this library, and b) will consider adding that functionality.

## Installation
Install with pip:

    pip install dircolors

Install from source:

    python setup.py install

Install from source in development mode:

    python setup.py develop

## Usage
Start by creating a `Dircolors` object and calling its `format()` method with the filename you want
to colorize.

```python
import dircolors
dc = dircolors.Dircolors()
print(dc.format('README.md'))
print(dc.format('dist/pydircolors.tar.gz')
print(dc.format('pydircolors.tar.gz', cwd='dist'))
```

As seen above, the `cwd` keyword argument looks for the filename relative to that directory. `cwd`
can be a string of the directory name, or an integer directory descriptor returned by `os.open()` on
the directory.

Symlinks are intelligently supported too. Set `follow_symlinks=True` to follow links and format the
link name like its target file. Set `follow_symlinks=False` (the default) and `show_target=True` to
print the link name, colored like a link, an ASCII arrow (`->`), and the link target, formatted
accordingly.

```
>>> print(dc.format('a_link', show_target=True))
a_link -> link_target
```

If you've already run `os.stat()` on a file, you can re-use the result to avoid extra syscall
overhead with the `format_mode()` method. `format_mode()` accepts arbitrary text to format (which
need not actually be the filename) and the file mode, which can be an `os.stat_result` object (as
returned by `os.stat()` or an integer of representing the `st_mode` field.

```python
stat_result = os.stat('some_file')
print(dc.format_mode('some_file', stat_result))
print(dc.format_mode('a_link', 0o0120777))
```

## Dircolors database sources
By default, `Dircolors` objects load from the `LS_COLORS` environment variable, just like GNU `ls`.
A variety of functions to load from custom `LS_COLORS` strings or `.dircolors` files are available
as well. All load functions will clear the currently loaded database, even if they fail to load any
useful data.

```python
dc.load_from_environ()                  # load from the LS_COLORS environment variable (the default)
dc.load_from_environ(env_var_name)      # load from a different environment variable
dc.load_from_lscolors('rs=0:di=01;34:') # load from an LS_COLORS string
dc.load_defaults()                      # use the defaults as generated by `dircolors -p`
dc.load_from_dircolors('.dircolors')    # load from a dircolors filename
dc.load_from_dircolors(open_file_obj)   # load from an open file-like object
```

## Documentation
Formal documentation is a TODO item. For now, this README provides basic usage and the docstrings in
[`dircolors.py`](https://github.com/aswild/pydircolors/blob/master/dircolors/dircolors.py) provide
more details.

## License
`pydircolors` is released under the Apache 2.0 license. Copyright 2019 Allen Wild \<allenwild93 at
gmail dot com\>

See the LICENSE.txt file for more information.

## TODO
Items needed for a v0.1.0 release:
  * Clean up `pyls` and add some argparse support. Also document it here.
  * Add tests for the color formatting functionality rather than just loading data.
  * Upload to PyPi

Items needed for a v1.0.0 release:
  * Sphinx documentation
  * Enhanced `pyls` functionality
  * Commit to a stable API
